Proposal for RubyGems Organizational Governance (#61)
rubygems/rfcs: text/0018-rubygems-governance.md

# RubyGems/Bundler Governance Proposal

## Preamble

This governance document establishes democratic processes for managing ownership and control of the RubyGems and Bundler projects. It is designed to prevent unilateral actions and ensure that all ownership changes are made through transparent, community-driven processes with proper notice, discussion, and voting.

> ## 1. Definitions

Reviewer: When using these phrases elsewhere in the document, it would be useful to capitalize them and bold the initial letters of each word, like they are in this section. That would make it clear when these words are used in a generic way vs a reference to these definitions.

* The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.
* **Owner**: A person with enterprise or organization owner permissions on GitHub for RubyGems/Bundler projects

> * **Maintainer**: A person with commit access to primary repositories who may or may not be an owner

Reviewer: Maintainers are currently only mentioned in _4.6 Implementation_, item 2.

Is there intended to be a way for Maintainers (as opposed to Owners) to directly raise concerns and require the Owners vote on it? Or would they effectively need an Owner to "sponsor" the request by submitting it on behalf of the Maintainer(s) in question?

Author: The original document had a whole maintainer section and I probably missed some bits trying to simplify. We could add it back in or adapt it somehow.

Reviewer 2: I agree it'd be useful to declare maintainers, too, and the process to which they are also added/removed.

I'd also suggest that maintainers are, like owners, also considered primarily on "what access rights do they get granted", "what do they need to use their jobs" and "what are they actually using?".

For a Homebrew example, we've had a bunch of maintainers removed over the years with high contribution levels but who don't e.g. review/merge PRs from anyone else. That doesn't need write access to the repository so: they don't get to keep it any more.

Reviewer 3: I think I'd start with just defining owners for this initial version of the document. Then add a "second level" of ownership through approving amendments to the document if we ever need. I think it's more important to get the fundamentals right that getting all the details in this first version.

Reviewer 2: @deivid-rodriguez Speaking from personal experience: the "let's start with something and iterate" works well with software but poorly with governance because, as defined by this document, all future iterations require majorities or supermajorities to be ratified which ends up being a lot of overhead for each improvement pass.

Reviewer 3: Well, I was hoping we introduce the initial version by unanimity among what we consider the current maintainers team. So majorities or supermajorities would actually be _less_ overhead than the initial version 😅.

> * **Primary Repositories**: rubygems/rubygems, rubygems/bundler, and related critical infrastructure repositories

Reviewer 2: May be worth defining these specifically

> * **Primary Repositories**: rubygems/rubygems, rubygems/bundler, and related critical infrastructure repositories

Author: ```suggestion
* **Primary Repositories**: rubygems/rubygems (includes bundler), rubygems/rubygems.org, rubygems/gemstash, rubygems and bundler websites, blog, guides, and all private infrastructure and related repositories.
```

* **Ordinary Resolution**: Requires a simple majority (>50%) of votes cast by owners
* **Special Resolution**: Requires a two-thirds supermajority (≥66.67%) of votes cast by owners
* **Quorum**: Minimum of 3 owners or 60% of total owners, whichever is greater
* **Notice Period**: Minimum 3 weeks advance notice for ownership votes

## 2. Owner Rights and Responsibilities

### 2.1 Rights

> 1. Vote on all ownership changes (additions and removals)

Reviewer 2: I would suggest that removals based on inactivity not be something that requires a vote as it can be done on documented, measurable requirements.

My experience with this sort of thing is that it's very easy for nostalgia and warm fuzzy feelings about humans you like to override best security practises.

Reviewer 3: I think sometimes activity or work done is hard to measure objectively. Some people get engaged mostly through comments and discussions, others through commits, reviews, documentation. So maybe additions based on proposals and vote among current owners is better? And similarly, deletions based on agreeing with the person being removed about her inactivity, or casting a vote if no agreement reached may be easier, too?

I do believe that casting a formal vote every time an owner wants to add or remove someone may be too much overhead. So I was thinking maybe having those formal voting processes just once a year, instead of "whenever a maintainer proposes a member for addition/removal". That gives time to think thoroughly about both additions and removals, and not get too ˝excited" about any of them. Of course, keeping proper "emergency processes" as proposed.

Author: I assume based on vote dynamics that ownership will change rarely but adding and removing maintainers is more common and is the job of one of the owners to do responsibly, not requiring a vote. We can document this or even let this comment serve as a guide for when we propose a maintainer section.

Reviewer 2: On this, I think it's touched elsewhere, but it's worth separating "leadership in project" and "technical access rights". I think it's very reasonable to have leadership only changing e.g. once a year. I think having someone get voted into a leadership permission, have full owner/admin/etc. access to everything and not use that for 11.5 months is a bit of a security hole.

2. Nominate new owners
3. Access to all project infrastructure and administrative functions
4. Participate in governance discussions and decisions

### 2.2 Responsibilities
1. Act in good faith for the benefit of the Ruby community
2. Participate in governance processes when reasonably able
3. Maintain active engagement with the project (see Section 4.2)
4. Follow established project policies and procedures
5. Respect the democratic governance process

## 3. Owner Addition Process

### 3.1 Nomination
1. Any existing owner MAY nominate a new owner candidate
2. Nominations MUST include:
   - Candidate's name and GitHub username
   - Statement of candidate's contributions and qualifications
   - Reason for nomination
   - Candidate's acceptance of nomination

### 3.2 Notice and Discussion Period

> 1. All nominations MUST be announced to owners with at least 3 weeks notice before voting
> 2. During the notice period:
>    - Owners MAY ask questions of the candidate
>    - Owners MAY voice support or concerns
>    - The candidate SHOULD participate in discussions
>    - Additional supporting statements MAY be provided
> 
> ### 3.3 Voting Process
> 1. After the notice period, a formal vote SHALL be held

Reviewer 4: The notice period has a minimum bound but not a maximum. Consider limiting the notice period, e.g., to four weeks. That way, a vote is at least three weeks but not more than four weeks away once a nomination is announced.

```suggestion
1. All nominations MUST be announced to all owners through a regular communications channel at least 3 weeks before voting.
2. During this notice period:
   - Owners MAY ask questions of the candidate
   - Owners MAY voice support or concerns
   - The candidate SHOULD participate in discussions
   - Additional supporting statements MAY be provided

### 3.3 Voting Process
1. A formal vote SHALL be held not more than four weeks after the nominations are announced.
```

One thing I dislike is the "be announced" passive voice. In organizations with a secretary, that'd be the secretary's job, IME. In the absence of a secretary, _somebody_ has to do it, or the process is in jeopardy of being contested.

2. Voting SHALL remain open for 1 week

> 3. Each owner gets one vote per candidate: Yes, No, or Abstain

Reviewer 4: While I'm here, a minor nit:

```suggestion
3. Each owner casts one vote per candidate: Accept, Reject, or Abstain
```

I like explicit action verbs in vote options.

4. A candidate is accepted by **ordinary resolution** (simple majority of votes cast, excluding abstentions)
5. Quorum MUST be met for the vote to be valid

### 3.4 Implementation

> 1. Accepted candidates SHALL be granted owner permissions within 1 week of vote completion

Reviewer 4: Could be explicit here:

```suggestion
1. Accepted candidates SHALL be granted owner permissions on primary repositories within 1 week of vote completion
```

2. New owners SHALL be provided with access to all relevant infrastructure and documentation

## 4. Owner Removal Process

### 4.1 Grounds for Removal

> Ownership removal MAY be iniated for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ownership removal MAY be initiated for:
```

> Ownership removal MAY be initiated for:

Author: ```suggestion
Ownership removal MUST be initiated for:
```

> 1. **Inactivity**: No meaningful project engagement for 12+ months

Reviewer 2: I would strongly suggest that this be a MUST or SHOULD, given the god-level of permissions that "owner" grants.

`brew contributions --org=rubygems` or similar may be useful for you here!

> 1. **Inactivity**: No meaningful project engagement for 12+ months

Reviewer 4: Quarterly access reviews seem standard, so consider an automatic revocation of owner access on that cadence with a "shall issue" restoration of access on demand within the owner's term. This process is more straightforward when there's a separation between decision-making rights and access rights, if that's appropriate for this organization.

You could also use something like "Unexcused inactivity" where it's basically radio silence and no affirmative when polling an inactive owner for their continued interest.

2. **Policy Violation**: Serious violations of project policies or code of conduct
3. **Breach of Trust**: Actions that undermine project governance or community trust

### 4.2 Activity Requirements
To maintain ownership, owners SHOULD demonstrate ongoing engagement through:

> - Code contributions or reviews

Reviewer 2: Given "principle of least privilege": I'd suggest that you think about "which people and responsibilities need owner rights" and remove it from people who don't "need" it.

All of "owner", "maintain", "write", etc. access shouldn't be seen as a privilege, recognition of good work, recognition of past work, etc. but instead be based on who is actually using these permissions to do work.

- Participation in governance discussions
- Infrastructure maintenance or support
- Community engagement and support

### 4.3 Removal Initiation
1. Any owner MAY initiate a removal process by:
   - Filing a formal proposal with specific grounds
   - Providing evidence supporting the removal
   - Notifying all owners with the proposal

### 4.4 Notice and Discussion Period
1. Removal proposals MUST be announced with at least 3 weeks notice
2. During the notice period:
   - The subject owner MUST be given opportunity to respond
   - All owners MAY participate in discussion
   - Additional evidence MAY be presented
   - Mediation SHOULD be attempted when appropriate

### 4.5 Voting Process
1. After the notice period, a formal vote SHALL be held
2. Voting SHALL remain open for 1 week

> 3. Each owner (including the subject) gets one vote: Yes (remove), No (retain), or Abstain

Reviewer 4: Following suit with my nit above:
```suggestion
3. Each owner, including the subject, MAY cast one vote: Remove, Retain, or Abstain
```

4. Removal requires **special resolution** (two-thirds supermajority of votes cast, excluding abstentions)
5. Quorum MUST be met for the vote to be valid
6. The subject owner MAY vote on their own removal

### 4.6 Implementation

> 1. If removal is approved, owner permissions SHALL be revoked within 48 hours

Reviewer 4: For decision-making rights, 48 hours is appropriate. For access controls, the requirement should have an immediate effect.

I think this adequately captures that, but you could also be explicit and freeze the removed owner from a "legal" standpoint:

```suggestion
1. If removal is approved, the removed owner MUST be notified immediately, SHALL NOT exercise any access rights granted to owners, and their permissions SHALL be revoked within 48 hours.
```

This gives _some_ teeth to the action: a removed owner may still have access to systems, but they are _immediately_ prohibited from using that access.

There's probably a slightly better way to phrase what I suggested in a manner more suitable for the context, but it's getting late…

> 2. The removed owner MAY retain maintainer access unless separately removed as maintainer

Reviewer 4: Need to disambiguate owner/maintainer here. There's conversation elsewhere. Could just remove it.
```suggestion
```

3. Removed owners MAY be re-nominated through the standard addition process

## 5. Emergency Procedures

### 5.1 Emergency Removal
In cases of immediate security threats, malicious activity, or legal violations:
1. Any owner with technical capability MAY immediately suspend access
2. Emergency action MUST be reported to all owners within 24 hours
3. A formal removal vote MUST be initiated within 1 week
4. If removal vote fails, access MUST be restored immediately

### 5.2 Emergency Owner Addition

> In cases where owner count falls below operational minimums:

Reviewer: What are the "operational minimums"?

Author: Yes, this is missing. I think 3 is the minimum, below which the policy can't work because you can't get a 2/3rds majority to remove someone with only 2 people.

Reviewer: That information could probably just be added under _Definitions_, then capitalize the first letter + bold it like I suggested for definitions in general.

Reviewer 4: Simplify and reference the quorum definition:

```suggestion
Should the number of owners fall below quorum requirements,
```

1. Remaining owners MAY expedite addition process with 1 week notice
2. Emergency additions require **ordinary resolution**

> 3. Emergency-added owners MUST be confirmed through normal process within 6 months

Reviewer 4: This may not have the intended effect. The section would be triggered when there are two owners. Ordinary resolution means unilateral addition is possible to get a third, then, six months later, if no more owners have been added, the three would vote on retaining the third. The third would likely Accept themselves as would their nominator. Ordinary resolution means that vote is effectively meaningless. Ordinary and special resolution are equivalent when N=3 or N=4.

If instead the _nominal_ minimum owners is 5, and this section refers to that, then this action has more effect.

## 6. Voting Procedures

### 6.1 Voting Methods
1. Votes SHALL be conducted through secure, verifiable means
2. Secret ballot voting SHOULD be used when requested by any owner
3. Vote tallies and outcomes SHALL be recorded and shared with all owners

### 6.2 Quorum and Validity
1. Votes without quorum are invalid and MUST be re-held
2. Owners MUST make good faith efforts to participate in votes

> 3. Extended absence during voting MAY be grounds for inactivity review

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Failure to vote SHOULD considered inactivity
```

This is a very strong SHOULD, a smidgen away from SHALL. The allowable case I can think of is that someone shouldn't lose their voice because they waited until the last minute to vote and then some emergency keeps them from voting before the deadline.

### 6.3 Record Keeping
1. All votes, proposals, and outcomes SHALL be documented
2. Records SHALL be accessible to all current owners
3. Historical governance decisions SHALL be preserved

## 7. Governance Changes

### 7.1 Amendment Process
1. Any owner MAY propose amendments to this governance document
2. Amendments require **special resolution** (two-thirds supermajority)
3. Amendment proposals MUST include:
   - Specific text changes
   - Rationale for changes
   - Impact assessment
4. Amendments follow the same notice and discussion period as removals

### 7.2 Adoption
1. This governance document MUST be adopted by **special resolution** of current owners
2. Adoption requires 3 weeks notice and discussion period
3. Once adopted, all ownership changes MUST follow these procedures

## 8. Conflict Resolution

### 8.1 Good Faith Requirement
All owners SHALL make good faith efforts to resolve disputes through discussion and compromise before formal votes.

### 8.2 Mediation
When disputes arise, owners MAY request neutral mediation from respected community members.

> ### 8.3 Appeals
> Removed owners MAY appeal their removal by:
> 1. Requesting reconsideration with new evidence
> 2. Addressing the concerns that led to removal
> 3. Appeals require **ordinary resolution** to succeed

Reviewer 4: This process is nearly identical to the addition process. Appeals feel nice but they're so close to just getting added that providing evidence for an appeal is operationally identical to the other justification material.

The only difference is that this section doesn't provide explicit difference for a notice period.

You might be able to simply drop this section or reduce it to something like this:

```suggestion
### 8.3 Appeals

1. Removed owners MAY appeal their removal by nominating themselves for addition upon the discovery of new evidence or having demonstrably addressed the concerns that led to removal.
2. Owners MAY choose by ordinary resolution to shorten the notice period for voting for appealing removed owners.
```

This way, self-nomination is permitted for removed owners only and the owners can shorten the notice period for expedited action. The week-long voting period remains unchanged.

## 9. Transition Period

### 9.1 Current Owner Review
Upon adoption of this governance:
1. All current owners SHALL be reviewed under the new standards
2. Any owner not meeting activity requirements MAY be subject to removal vote
3. Transition votes SHALL follow standard procedures with 3 weeks notice

### 9.2 Grandfathering
1. Current owners in good standing SHALL retain ownership unless removed through proper procedures
2. Past inactivity periods SHALL NOT automatically trigger removal
3. Focus SHALL be on future engagement and contribution

## 10. Implementation

> This governance document SHALL take effect immediately upon adoption by special resolution of current project owners. All subsequent ownership changes MUST follow these procedures without exception.

Reviewer: Do we have a defined list of who the "current project owners" are considered for the purposes of this document?

Reviewer 3: Great question, we have like 5 different lists of "project owners" spread across many places 🤣. A good outcome of this, other than a governance model document, would be unifying and consolidating those lists.

I guess a way would be to start with current rubygems organization owner list, and then modify it using the governance model that we approve, and then propagate that to the other places (or change those places to point to the "source of truth").
